Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricard Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Dr Zachary Garfield. He's assistant
professor at Mohammed, the sixth Polytechnic University in the
Faculty of Governance, Economics and Social Sciences and co-director
of the Omo Valley Research project. His research program
focuses on relationships between individual behavioral strategies and group
dynamics in the context of cultural transitions. And today
we're focusing mostly on leadership from an evolutionary perspective,
conflict resolution and other related topics. So Dr Garfield,
welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. It's great to be here. I'm
looking forward to it.
So perhaps let's start with a bit of uh
background here. So, um how do you approach leadership
from an evolutionary perspective? And in this case, particularly
from the perspective of evolutionary anthropology?
Yeah, that's a, that's a great place to start.
So leadership studies is obviously this, this huge field,
you have a lot of work by scientists, economists,
um the whole field of management. Um And so
approaching it from an evolutionary perspective is a bit
of a unique take. Uh And we attempt to
really integrate all these diverse findings, all these diverse
perspectives. Um Evolutionary anthropology as a sort of sub
discipline of anthropology is in and of itself very
multifaceted and interdisciplinary. So we're trying to integrate theories
and perspectives from across the social sciences within a
nat natural science framework. Um TAKING this comparative perspective,
this cross cultural perspective. And so when it comes
to thinking about leadership, um evolutionary anthropology thinks about
how leadership is really, what's its adaptive role, what's
the sort of cultural evolutionary dynamics underlying it? Um
We were thinking about how leadership processes vary across
different types of communities based on their economic or
other cultural features. Um And it really suggests that
leadership is this product of human evolutionary history. So
we have some, some history that is, that is
driving the processes and the variation that we see
today. Uh And so what, what we use and
exhibit today as a species is based on this
evolutionary history. And so this is really um we
see leadership as a tool and it's a tool
that has an evolutionary history and it's a tool
that's used to solve a particular problem. Uh And
in most cases, that problem is the problem of
group living or, or being in groups, existing in
groups. And it might seem kind of obvious to
us that, you know, we, we live in groups,
that's just how life goes for a social species
like us. Um And we humans like almost all
primates who are obligated to social life. So we
can't survive or thrive in isolation. Um But actually
most mammals, about 70% of mammals do not live
in groups, presumably because the cost of group living
are, are so high. Um You know, in groups,
we more easily spread disease, we can more easily
get into conflicts over territory or mates for other
resources. Um We might consume resources at a higher
rate. And so if groups are going to persist,
we need to overcome and offset these costs. And
so leadership is one way we can organize and
resolve a lot of these costs of group living
and really, you know, gain the benefits from being
in a group because it can be very advantageous.
Uh And we're um you know, there are a
lot of ways being in a group can really
facilitate our individual survival in the production. We're obviously
we're better protected. Uh We have helpers nearby, we
have an easier time finding mates and we can
work together to accomplish things that we couldn't on
our own. So, effective leadership is a solution to
this coordinate and motivation problem uh that groups face.
And so um this perspective really emphasizes the importance
of understanding leadership in the context of human adaptability
and survival and across different domains of social interaction
across different ecological settings.
Mhm But just to make one point clear because
I think that is at a certain point there
you mentioned uh a cultural evolutionary perspective. So when
it comes to leadership, at least you in in
your work approach, it not only from, let's say,
uh more genetic slash biological evolutionary perspective, but you
also include uh uh cultural evolutionary framework to, right.
It's, I mean, it's not just about biology or
perhaps some of the ways by which leadership might
have evolved as an adaptation and we'll get into
that later, but also about uh cultural evolutionary dynamics.
Correct. Yes, definitely. And you know, even a lot
of the, the management field is kind of found
or come to this question, uh independent of any
evolutionary perspective as well, the sort of question are
leaders born or are leaders made. Um But clearly,
it's, it's an interaction and it's a product of,
of both processes. So, you know, there are physiological
components that facilitates social influence. Um And, you know,
some of the heritability studies have found that leadership
traits, like basically every trait are heritable, you know,
maybe between 40 60%. Um But yes, I am
thinking about uh you know, physiological or psychological traits
that facilitates influence, which could include things like physical
formidability um or good decision making capacities. But also
it depends on the, the social and the cultural
environment that individuals are embedded within. Um And so,
you know, who has uh knowledge or expertise within
particular domains. Um And also the, the context in
which the problems individuals are trying to solve um
whether it has to do with intergroup conflict or
within group operation. Um If there is some sort
of um information that needs to be transmitted from
one generation to the next. And so, yeah, you
really need, and this is another big benefit of
taking this evolutionary anthropological perspective. You need to think
about both the cultural and the biological dynamics and
how they're interrelated to really understand human leadership.
Mhm So I, I mean, this might sound like
a sort of uh naive question, but I think
it's an important one to address here. So when
you look across different human societies and even if
you're looking into other animals as models, how do
you identify a leader? I mean, how do you
say so that particular individual in that particular society
plays a role as a leader?
Yeah, that's an important point. And so operational leadership
is really where we, we have to start. And
so most of my colleagues and I think about
leadership broadly and so we're defining leaders as individuals
who have some disproportionate influence within a, within a
group. And that's pretty basic, pretty broad definition. What
we have to do then is to find the
group. And so when you define the group, then
you can think about is influence completely uniform or
is there some variability? And if there's some variability,
then you basically can identify individual leaders. And this
definition is very useful because it allows us to
think about the psychological, the behavioral dimensions of leadership
in a very broad way. So a lot of
my colleagues, maybe, for example, in, let's say, political
science, if you talk about leadership, they might be
thinking about people like heads of state. Um And
that might be the sort of first uh uh
idea that many individuals have in thinking about leaders.
But from a behavioral perspective, from a psychological perspective,
leadership is going on in so many different domains,
not just, you know, at, at the nation level
or at the group level, but anytime you have
some individuals who are coming together and, and interacting
together, there's likely to be variable social influence. And
so this allows us to think about any type
of group, um you know, a political group, a
work group, um a religious group or ritual group,
but also various social groups, you know, groups of
kids playing are probably going to exhibit some leadership
dynamics. Uh And families are probably going to exhibit
some, some very obvious leadership dynamics, but probably some
leadership dynamics that are central to human leadership interactions.
And this is where a lot of our work
has, has gone to and thinking about how leadership
within the family might be shaping or have shaped
the evolutionary history of our leadership psychology. So, yeah,
when we think about a group of individuals, we
can identify who has influence and we can do
this in a variety of ways it could be,
maybe based on some, some observational data it could
be raised on, on peer ratings or there are
a variety of ways we could get at that.
Um But really in, in any group of individuals
we can think about who has influence and, and
that then is how we would define leadership.
Mhm. So what would be the main hypothesis out
there in the particular context of evolutionary anthropology? But
if you want, you can expand to other disciplines
who also deal with leadership, who what that also
deal with leadership? Uh What are the main hypothesis
there in terms of evolutionary models to explaining the
evolution of leadership?
Well, there would be a few, I mean, I
think at the foundation, we can, we would predict
that leadership is going to provide some benefits to
individuals and also to groups. And so the process
of leadership and followership should be beneficial for both
leaders and followers, at least on average over the
long term. Um Now it's a difficult task for
leaders to really optimize outcomes for many diverse followers.
So not every follower based on every leadership interaction
is going to going to benefit necessarily. Um BUT
over the long term, it should be a benefit
for individuals and for groups. So that would be
one hypothesis that we would predict. Um WE could
also make some predictions about the traits of leaders.
Um YOU know, they should be individuals who are
able to solve the problems that that particular leadership
is, is trying to accomplish. So it, it might
include um physical formidability. If, if that's important, it
might include intelligence, if that's important or special knowledge.
And we can also make some predictions about the
functions of leadership. So if leadership is this tool
to solve the problem of the group living, we
can sort of retrofit and think about, you know,
what are the problems groups are going to face?
And obviously, that's going to include a lot of
potential conflicts, uh coordinate problems. So we could predict
that leaders will be, you know, resolving conflicts and
trying to, to manage coordinations and so forth. So
those would be a few sort of key predictions
and what many of the theories have kind of
focused on?
Mhm And is it that one hypothesis has more
support than the others or not?
Well, as I mentioned at the beginning of this
conversation, leadership is so diverse. So it really depends
on the context in which you're, you're you're thinking
about. So I wouldn't necessarily suggest that any hypothesis
or theory has more support, but each sort of
partitioning leadership in a in some, in some way
and focusing on it in a, in a more
specific uh approach. Um So all the theories that
I've worked with have have some support um but
they all have shortcomings as well. And so a
real challenge of the field is to uh integrate
and sort of synthesize and, and reshape these theories
as we get more and more empirical evidence. And
so that's a problem that I think, you know,
just traditional management studies has faced and that all
the disciplines face in that day discipline, the sort
of focus of a particular discipline constrains that maybe
the methodologies also the sort of the data they
look at and we need many different diverse sorts
of data to really understand human leadership if, if
that's the goal. Um And so the evolutionary approach,
I think has been somewhat successful to this point,
there's still obviously much work to be done. Um
But we have begun to integrate fields, you know,
insights from biology and political science and psychology and
so forth. So I think all of these theories
have important strengths but they don't have shortcomings. And
that's what some of my work has been focused
on, is trying to, trying to synthesize and trying
to um make some contributions by connecting some dots.
And, and a lot of my colleagues in the
evolutionary social sciences are doing much of the same
thing.
Is there good enough evidence to support the idea
that leadership might have evolved as an adaptation for
an an evolutionary adaptation, of course.
Um Yeah, I think there are, there is so
well for one, we, we see leadership in every
human society um and many social animals, although they
are, you know, like I said before, they're a
minority of social species. Um But a number of
biologists have suggested that all social species have some
sort of leadership that doesn't necessarily mean that it's
an adaptation. But it, it could be uh when
it comes to human or maybe even like primates
leadership. Uh There are some, some cues and some
hints that there might be some sort of adaptive
psychology underlying it. Uh For one is the sort
of dominant style of leadership where individuals have influence
based on capacities to instill fear in followers or
to coerce or control um individuals physically based on
physical strength. Um Although it could also be social
strength um based on social capacities, and we do
see, you know, there's some, there's a variety of
findings that suggest that, you know, even when physical
formidability should be uh should not be relevant for
leadership dynamics. We still see people like who are
taller, having social influence or who are stronger um
being chosen or preferred as leaders. So that's a
hint that our psychology has this sort of uh
you know, this history of this primate heritage that's
shaping who we prefer as leaders. Um So yeah,
if you look at different heads of states, sometimes
they're, they're taller than, than, than the average height.
And you, you see a variety of, there's a
variety of studies that show that um physical formidability
is preferred in certain contexts as well. And so
that kind of suggests that, you know, we have
this, this, this evolutionary history where individuals who were
physically formidable, were good leaders. That could be because
they were um coercive, it could be because they
were good at deterring free riders. It could be
because they were good in between group competition. Um
But something about those traits were probably useful over
a long period of evolutionary history. And it seems
that our psychology today um also has those biases.
So that's, that's a hint that there might be
a sort of adaptive leader follower psychology underlying a
lot of the sort of sociopolitical processes that we
exhibit today.
So as you mentioned, at a certain point there,
when people think about leadership and leaders, we tend
to think about heads of state, political leaders, reps
leaders in companies and so on. But as an
anthropologist, of course, uh you're also interested in looking
across different uh human societies. And also I would
guess from an evolutionary perspective, the more traditional ones
are very important to look into because uh both
the contemporary ones and the historical ones serve at
least to some extent as good models to the
kinds of societies we might have evolved in during
our evolutionary history. So how does the leadership look
like in more traditional societies? Like for example, hunter
gatherers, horticulturalists and so on?
Yeah. So we evolutionary anthropologists, you know, we do
uh tend to focus on rural, more subsistence based
societies. And yeah, like you pointed out they do
have many characteristics in common that we tend to
associate with our long term evolutionary history. Uh It's
of course important to point out that, you know,
none of the ethnographically observed societies or contemporary hunter
gatherers or small scale societies are, are perfect um
replicas of our ancient evolutionary history. Uh But they
are oftentimes in some cases, they're, they're living relatively
independent of state level influences. Um They may be
less market integrated as well. And so that is
a very unique uh circumstance and the circumstance we
think does apply to our long evolutionary history. And
it basically means that individuals have to, you know,
the communities have to, you know, solve the problem
of groups living on their own with different systems
of leadership. And so you don't necessarily have uh
you know, state uh processes and influences, identifying or,
or mandating certain individuals be leaders or not. And
so that is a very unique opportunity. And so
then, yes, we can think about in more egalitarian
societies. What are the contexts of leadership? Now? It
tends to be a much more nuanced and context
specific. And that's important to emphasize that even in
all egalitarian societies, it seems that there are individuals
who emerge as leaders in some context and they
may not have uh strong institutional control or course
of authority. Um But leadership does emerge and it
also typically is not based on some inherited status
or, or wealth distinctions, there's a strong cultural ethos
of sharing. Um And so leadership is really fluid
in these social contexts, it tends to be based
on individual skills. So, you know, what are your
individual capacities? How can you best benefit the group?
How can you solve the problems the group is
facing? And then it's often linked to very specific
context or needs. Um So it might depend on
um culturally valued skills uh or whatever the group
is particularly facing that in that exact context.
Mhm uh And so you've already mentioned that in
an earlier question, but just to recap and also
for people to get a better understanding of how
things work in these more egalitarian societies. So what
exactly are the functions of leaders in these societies?
Because people might just think, oh, I mean, if
they are all cooperating, if the society is egalitarian,
then what do they need leaders for?
Exactly. Yeah, I think a key function that leaders
in egalitarian societies are providing uh this really broad
and, and probably universal is conflict resolution. Uh So
you have lots of conflicts of interest. Uh And
this occurs at every level of social organization, you
know, you have conflicts within families, anyone who has
been in a family or has kids or has
partners knows that conflicts can emerge, regardless of how
well integrated and cohesive. You are as a, as
a sort of social unit and the same applies
as you sort of scale up um in social
groups, in ritual groups and, and then in larger
scale kin groups, conflicts are just ubiquitous. And so
you need individuals who can solve conflicts. And doing
so requires having a sort of a good model
of a mental model of all the individuals involved.
You know, what is going to be uh an
outcome that will most likely resolve this particular conflict.
And that's very, it can be very difficult. It
requires probably a lot of experience, knowledge, intelligence. Um
And it seems that this sort of demand for
conflict resolution has probably driven a lot of the
other sort of status differentiation or hierarchies that we
might see across the broadway societies. And we also
see this function of conflict resolution in different nonhuman
species as well. So there's probably a long evolutionary
history of the need to resolve conflicts in social
groups. So I think that's a really broad function
that leaders are going to be serving. But then
within different uh sort of social groups or economic
groups, there's a lot of other functions as well.
Um A key function from hunter gatherers has to
do with subsistence. So um leading in, in hunting,
for example, or in foraging, uh you know, individuals
have there's informational asymmetry in the group. This is
also another another phenomenon that will drive leadership emergence.
So an individuals either know how to build tools
or know how to hunt or know where to
go to forge or to find and very important
resources that's going to lead to some sort of
leader follower dynamics. So yeah, things related to subsistence
and resolving conflicts, I think would be what I
would point to as being some of the most
critical domains and where leadership emerges in egalitarian societies.
And so associated with that, what are then the
kinds of uh psychological traits that people tend to
prefer in leaders uh in this particular case, in
more traditional societies. And then we can also talk
about the more modern uh bigger scale societies. Of
course.
Well, we have found um in both cross cultural
studies and also in some of my field work.
Um THERE are a few traits that really seem
to emerge as being preferred or at least common
across a broad range of social contexts. And so
one key trait that tends to emerge across a
lot of different studies is having special knowledge or
being intelligence now. And I'm kind of, I'm not
gonna kind of put aside how to unpack the
definition of intelligence and what that really means. Um
But it seems that, you know, a lot of
it's a lot of individuals, a lot of societies
have some sort of endogenous cultural model that there
are people who are good at making decisions that
have special knowledge and that are effective at um
you know, managing conversations about different topics and coming
to solutions. So having this sort of cognitive capacity
is seems to be really important and associated with
leadership um being generous is also very important. So
a lot of egalitarian societies, like I mentioned, have
this strong ethos of, of sharing and individuals who
are, are very prosocial uh are, are valued and
respected and that sort of is a sort of
feedback loop that's going to also be associated with
social influence. Um The leadership isn't necessarily just this,
you know, very altruistic behavior. So it can be
mutually beneficial. And there are a lot of important
theories to think about how, you know, leadership behavior
and fellowship outcomes are should be and are mutually
beneficial. But nonetheless, leaders are often also strategically nepotistic.
So while they are offering some some policies or
some outcomes for the group, they're able to shape
those outcomes still in some way that's going to
preferentially benefit themselves um or their kin. And so
we have found evidence that leaders are tend to
be strategically nepotistic across a wide variety of cultures.
And that makes sense, you know, you are paying
some cost to offer this service to the group.
Um It's, it's an opportunity cost, it can be,
it can be socially costly as well. And so
individual leaders also need to reap some benefits uh
from those investments. And we also see, not only
do leaders get this sort of special status, often
case is the case from prestige or other special
positions, they're often getting a lot of material resources,
um, and other, other, other resources that sort of
offset the cost that they're, they're paying.
Mhm. By the way, in these more traditional societies,
do you find, do you usually find one single
leader or could there be multiple leaders? Like, I
don't know, I'm just guessing. But for example, a
top hunter and a shaman, for example, could they
both be leaders because they have different competences or
not?
Yes. That's exactly the case. So across a wide
range of the ethnographic record, you see these sort
of specialized leadership roles, um There tends to be
sort of a maybe a community leader, a headman.
Um There's often a term that's used or a
big man and this individual tends to be someone
who's sort of good at a lot of things
uh widely respected probably in their sort of prime
of their sort of adult years. Um BUT not
necessarily an expert at any one particular thing. And
they might be sort of a, a group representative.
Um You know, sort of the first among equals
is the phrase that's been used to apply to
this position. But then you might have a military
specialist if there is intergroup conflict. Um You might
have a shaman as you mentioned, who is a
sort of repository of, of ritual knowledge and provides
a lot of other supernatural functions for the group.
Um And you could have other leaders in particular
domains, you could have um sort of um religious
leaders or individuals who sort of are managing sort
of cosmology that's passed on from one generation to
the next. And in many societies and particularly more
egalitarian um societies, you do have these being distinct
roles where individuals, you know, different individuals are exhibiting
leadership in these different domains. Um And they can
be flexible too. So as maybe intergroup conflict um
rises and falls, let's say over a period of
time, the individual who might be this military leader,
their influence will rise and fall as well. So
the demands of the group will track um who
has influence and to what degree. Now, what I
find really interesting is that at some point, um
certain societies, these different roles tend to tend to
coalesce. And so if you think about like um
Aztec and other uh early state level societies, you
have these leaders who are the supernatural leader, also
the, the military leader and the sort of sociopolitical
leader as well. And so I think that's kind
of an open question right now is when and
how different individuals, these to be leaders and one
individual sort of monopolizes these different domains. And there's
some interesting work on um you know how chiefdoms
emerge from a history of more, more hunter gatherer
or horticultural type uh sociopolitical dynamics. Because in chiefdoms,
you often do have um supernatural and economic and
military force all being combined into a central role
and then then really limits followers ability to sort
of push back and have some bargaining power with
their leader. And that seems to be an important
dynamic that breaks a lot of the egalitarian dynamics
and allows those, those leaders who re monopolize military,
supernatural and political force to have that coercive authority
that is otherwise often absent when those are distinct
roles and when followers maintain a lot of, um,
yeah, a lot of, um, sort of what's called
reverse dominance or the ability to really push back
against aggressive leadership.
Mhm uh Actually, I was also going to ask
you about that specifically. So earlier, for example, when
you also mentioned that leadership dynamics tend to be
very fluid in more egalitarian societies, that also includes
the possibility of particular leaders being replaced or even
people just getting rid of them if for some
reason, they're, they're not fulfilling their role or they
try to curse or oppress people in their society,
for example.
Yes, exactly. And so, you know, a lot of
egalitarian societies especially over, you know, across the ethnographic
record have been highly mobile and they rely on
a stochastic resource base. So, you know, whether it's
hunted game or seasonal forged foods, um they could,
they move around a lot and that mobility gives
them a lot of freedom. And so if there
is a particular, you know, up and coming domineering
leader who's really trying to, to push their weights
uh and getting a bit overboard individuals can break
off and they can, the groups can vision and
people can sort of go their own way. Um
And yet in these more egalitarian societies, individuals have
a lot of mechanisms to push back against, against,
over really dominant leaders. And Christoph Bom, for example,
has done a lot of work on this looking
at uh actually evidence of what you would just
what you could call assassinations effectively. Um If, if
individuals are becoming too forceful, if not adhering to
the sort of prosocial norms and offering benefits to
followers, you know, people have access to, to spears
to, to other weapons. Uh There's not a monopoly
on military sort of control. So, yeah, people can,
first of all usually push back. Uh OFTENTIMES they'll,
you know, get elders involved, try and advise and
get this individual to, you know, exhibit leadership and,
you know, offer the services of leadership. But in
a more prosocial, culturally um consistent way, if that
doesn't work, then they can be ostracized and be
punished, you know, worst case scenario, they can be
uh deserted uh or in the extreme, they can
be, yeah, they can be assassinated. Um So, yeah,
this really holds leaders in check. Um And that
is a sort of important component of leadership in
these more egalitarian societies, the ability to really push
back and control leaders if need be.
Do we have a good idea of how societies
go past the threshold where leadership can accumulate so
much power that it can become more coercive and
hold more control over the re uh for example,
a particular leader over the rest of the individuals
of a particular society. Does that have anything to
do with being able to accumulate more resources or
some other thing?
Well, I think it has to do partly with,
there's a few things going on but it has
to do partly with the resource control. So when
resources then can become monopolized, um property becomes demarcated
territory, becomes more individually owned, this all helps facilitate.
Um YEAH, course of the emergence of coercive influence.
Um And then another important component is intergroup interactions.
So when there's a strong threats of intergroup violence
or intergroup attacks, individuals tend to prefer a more
aggressive leader. And so, you know, we can think
about variety of um outcomes in, in contemporary international
politics. When intergroup threat is high, people tend to
prefer a more dominant leader or they're willing to
sacrifice certain individual liberties for the sake of being
protected. Uh And we see that in across the
ethnographic record as well, um as intergroup violence may
go up or down, uh individuals are willing to
relinquish some of that autonomy that is so essential
to egalitarian societies. Um So, yeah, I think economic
specialization or development or uh the ability to monopolize
resources and intergroup threats, both play a role in
this emergence of more social stratification of leadership.
A and also you were mentioning there are more
modern industrialized or post industrial societies, I guess. And
i it, it's also the case that when there's,
for example, social and economic instability, people tend to
prefer more authoritarian leaders, for example.
Right. Yeah, exactly. Um You know, we can think
about, you know, after 911 in the US, we
have these shifts in policies that people are more
willing to subscribe to. You can sort of pick
your favorite historical example. Um There, there are countless
examples. And so um this shows that leadership is,
is an important function and one of those functions
is protection. Um But there's sort of a sort
of a double sided coin here and that there's
uh relinquishing autonomy for protection also then can lead
to, to costs as those, those those leaders then
have the ability to be more exploitative and um
channel more resources to their own outcomes. And there's
less than sort of recourse for followers to keep
them in check.
Mhm So at this point, can we say exactly
what are the universal and variable dimensions of leadership
across societies?
Yeah. So, you know, in my research, I've done
a lot of cross cultural work where I I
leverage the ethnographic record. So the ethnographic, the ethnographic
record is just the, the collection of documents that
anthropologists mostly have produced over the past maybe 200
years or so. Um And so we can access
this record in a very user friendly way from
a researcher perspective, we can review lots of different
paragraphs and texts about leadership, for example. And so
I've built databases that uses this very diverse ethnographic
record of, of human societies. And with my colleagues,
we've, you know, coded these paragraphs and we do
the statistics and um inner reliability and all these
things. And so this allows us to investigate the
qualities of leaders, the functions. And we've also looked
at the costs and benefits of leadership for both
leaders and followers. And so with this methodology, we
can offer some perspective on what traits seem to
be universal, meaning they, they don't vary really across
different societies based on their subsistence strategy. So let's
say 100 Gers compared to agriculturists or based on
the sort of social context in which leadership is
emerging, maybe, for example, a political leader versus a
kin group leader. Uh We also look at region,
you know, these societies are distributed around the globe.
And we also think about um leadership, gender. There's
a big bias in the epigraphic record of leadership.
It's heavily male bias, but we nonetheless do have
some evidence on women's leadership. And when we've done
all this, we found that there are a few
traits that do seem to emerge as not really
varying systematically along these lines. And so I've mentioned
a few of these before, but the key is
um having special knowledge, being intelligent, this is widespread
across societies across different contexts, uh resolving conflicts and
providing various sort of social functions seems to be
the key job the leaders are doing. Um And
then, you know, leaders are often wealthy, which that
could be, that's obviously culturally determined what that wealth
is. It's not necessarily, you know, having money in
the bank, but uh you know, whatever the material,
uh whatever material wealth there is in the particular
community, leaders seem to be high on that. Um
And then they're really benefiting their family and they're
being generous. So these are some of the qualities
that we see that um don't systematically vary across
group type uh across the system type. Um ET
cetera. Mhm
So you mentioned one specific thing there that I
would like to ask you more about. So you
mentioned that uh in the ethnographic record, uh it
seems that uh the overwhelming evidence is that across
most societies that we know of at least uh
the leaders tend to be uh men. Uh But
uh I, I mean, uh be because this gets
us into very contentious discussions and questions, some of
them perhaps sometimes point to some sex or gender
differences that might be or might not be e
evolved between men and women. So, um I, I
mean, do you know if that really points to
some evolved biological differences between men and women or
not? Or that it could be more culture uh
a more culturally based uh thing?
Yeah. So there's a lot we could unpack here
and there's at least, you know, two important things
I would want to think about. Ok, first of
all, yes, you're exactly right. You know, we, when,
when we talk about community level leaders or sort
of like the political leader of a group, there
is a huge male bias and that seems to
be the case for, um, most societies, even including
highly egalitarian societies. Um, NOW, in egalitarian societies, there
is more gender equality, there is more opportunity for
women to have sociopolitical influence. But nonetheless, it is
still biased towards men. And there's been a number
of cross cultural reports um and other empirical studies
that have kind of consistently found this this result.
Um However, if we go back to our conversations
about how we define leadership, it depends on how
you define leadership to get this result. If you're
talking about community level, sociopolitical leaders, that's one thing.
Um But one thing that's, you know, my colleagues
and I have tried to emphasize is that leadership
is occurring within any social group. And so if
we think about leadership within kin groups or within
families, um it might be the case that women
are, are exhibiting much more leadership in these types
of social groups. So it could be that there's
um specializations in leadership based on sort of a
division of labor or a gender or a sexual
division. And that maybe men are offering more leadership
at the group level, uh this sort of sociopolitical,
higher level and women are often offering more leadership
uh within smaller groups or within family groups. That's
as a hypothesis. But I think there's some evidence
that has led us to, to think this way.
Um Yeah, so that's, that's one component. Another thing
would be that now, what are the traits of
leadership or is there some, you know, physiological or
biological structure or, or, or traits driving men to
be sociopolitical leaders or not? Well, I think what
the evidence has suggested in, in my work and
some of the work of my colleagues is that
it's, it's not so much that it's gender or
sex is a strong predictor of leadership, but it's
that uh there seems to be specializations in, in
behaviors and traits and the way, the way that
men and women tend to um behave in an
economic system and that seems to be driving the
differences that we see. So for example, when we
consider gender or sex in these statistical models, we
often don't find that it's a strong predictor of
differences in leadership. It seems more that there's a
gender division, there's a sexual division of labor and
that tends to be associated with leadership at the
community level. Whereas women are more often engaging in,
in household economic demands and working within smaller groups.
There's a few men who then are offering more
of these leadership services at the group level. And
so it seems to be that this bias in
male leadership at the community level might just be
an effect or consequence of the sexual division of
labor, which might be related to a variety of
other things. But, you know, economic demand, um childcare
and the way our societies are, are structured as
a whole. So that wouldn't suggest that there's any
that suggests that there isn't any, you know, physiological
or psychological differences that favor male or female leaders
at the, at the community level. But there's a
variety of other economic and social structures that are
facilitating that, that gender bias. Um
So I I have two more questions about that
specifically about uh differences in leadership between men and
women. So when we have women leaders uh do,
do their traits tend to follow along the ones
that characterize uh male leaders or do they tend
to be slightly different?
Well, it's, it depends, but there is some evidence
that it does tend to be slightly different. Um
There's also some interesting work in interest in psychology
and management. There's been a lot of work on
this. Uh So women leaders, but it depends on
the study. So there's basically results aren't mixed. Um
But there is some evidence that women leaders do
tend to be more cooper and emphasize more participatory
approaches. Um But this is obviously highly variable. Um
So basically, what I take from this literature is
that the sort of social and cultural context really
plays an important role. Um But it does seem
like that men are more prone to a certain
style of leadership, particularly more aggressive leadership. Um Women
do tend to be more um yeah, participatory and
inclusive. And you see some evidence of this even
among Children. Uh THERE'S not a lot of great
work on social influence and leadership among Children. There
is some uh and some of this work has
found that uh younger girls tend to be more
prosocial or tend to use more of these mixed
strategies of getting social influence. Whereas young boys tend
to be a bit more uh coercive. Um So,
yeah, there is some evidence that there's sort of
uh different profiles of leadership based on, based on
gender. Um There's also a lot of work that
suggests that women do tend to be more effective
in conflict resolution in different cultural contexts. Um I've
done some work among the chau, they're a relatively
egalitarian border horticultural group. Uh And in the chau,
their cultural model is really that women are good
at resolving conflicts because uh men tend to be
more aggressive, tend to be more hothead. And if
there's a conflict between men or between anyone and
a man gets involved to try and resolve it,
he's gonna bring these, these biases and this sort
of uh quick, quick temper and that's going to
escalate the conflict. Whereas women on the other hand,
are more, more reserved or at least more, less
quick to be aggressive and um that's going to
be more effective at resolving inter individual conflicts. So,
in, in the childhood cultural model, women are much
more skilled at providing leadership services and conflict resolution.
Um I I recently did a study on conflict
resolution with my colleague, Luke Glowacki among Hammer, this
is a rural paulist community, very patriarchal, so very
different than the chau it's not an egalitarian society.
Uh It's, it's very socially stratified and biased towards
um basically preferring um male influence and male ownership
of property and so forth. But one interesting finding
from the study was we found that in inter
individual conflicts between men and women, women often do
emerge as conflict mediators as well. So this is
sort of one signal that in this very patriarchal
society where women have less sociopolitical influence and less
leadership opportunities uh offering conflict resolution services was an
interesting opportunity for female leadership. And so this really
also suggest that conflict resolution is probably a uh
an important feature of women's leadership across a wide
range of societies and something we wanna look more
into.
Great. By, by the way, let me just mention
that I have an interview with Dr Luke Lo
Ai on the show for people who might be
interested. We talked about human warfare. Uh So one
more question before we move on to another topic
about uh men and women leaders. So uh do
you think that it would be fair to say,
then that if uh human leadership and these differences
between men and women is based or stems from
the sexual division of labor and the sexual division
of labor itself, at least as far as I
understand, it depends a lot on ecological factors, on
how the society is structured uh on economic factors
and even to some extent, sometimes uh cultural factors,
because of course, there's also uh gender roles and
gender expectations. And we know even in our more
modern industrialized societies, just over the past few decades,
that we have certain expectations as to the roles
that women could fulfill and now those have changed.
So, um I mean, is that all correct? And
if so then would it be fair to say
that? I mean, those sort of more uh simplistic
ideas that people sometimes have that men are more
fit to be leaders or to fulfill leadership roles
are just because they are biologically one way and
women biologically another way. And of course, I'm not
dismissing here evolved differences because that might also play
a role in terms of the kinds of roles
that men and women tend to fulfill in different
societies. But that, that idea that it's just about
men and women being biologically different. And that would
explain why supposedly men are better leaders is too
simplistic.
Right. Well, yes, I think that is too simplistic.
I think you're, you're right in that, you know,
the gender, gender divisions of labor are playing an
important role and those are like you said, it's
gonna be culturally and economically constructed. So it's gonna
do, it's gonna vary greatly based on socio-economic context.
Um But I do think there, well, we have
found widespread evidence of this sort of pushback effect
that has been documented by management scholars and comes,
comes from psychology. This is the idea that when
women exhibit this more coercive uh uh as assertive
leadership, they would otherwise be lauded as strong leadership.
If it was a man, uh tend to receive,
you know, pushback uh their, their bossy, you know,
a whole number of negative uh affect of labels,
get, get applied to women when they exhibit the
exact same leadership characteristics that would otherwise be respected
if they were to be a man. And so
we might think that that is a product of
um you know, a patriarchal system or the social
stratification system. But surprisingly, we found evidence of a
similar effect even in the chau community I mentioned
earlier, uh you know, in chau, it is very
gender egalitarian. Um WHEN you, if you talk to
people, you know, they, there's no evidence of really
a male or female bias. Um But when we
did the sort of systematic data collection on a
sample of individuals who were some were leaders, some
are not, we collected data on a wide range
of traits, including things like being respected, being prosocial,
um being aggressive, getting in fights. We found that
many of the men who were in these leadership
positions were, were respected but were also feared and
also were known for getting invites. And it displayed
a lot of qualities of both, what we might
call prestige and dominance. Um Their counterparts, their female
counterparts. On the other hand, uh the women were
also intelligent and respected and prosocial and all these
things, but they systematically were not, uh described as
being feared or getting in fights. So it seemed
that even among the chau, you know, the women
who were, um, a bit more aggressive were not
in these elected leadership positions. So that was some
evidence that there's a, a sort of pushback against
women when they're trying, when they use these more
assertive social strategies. Um Now what that means for,
uh, our, our deep psychological biases. I, I'm, I'm
less, I'm less sure. Um, BUT it does seem
that there's, there's evidence that there's this sort of
pushback against this aggressive female leadership in, in different
contexts.
Mhm. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's also very complicated
to disentangle all of these things, biology and culture.
And, uh, I mean, we have these average evolved
sex differences and, uh o of course, people in
human societies also take notice of that and that's
perhaps one of the places where uh gender stereotypes
stem from. But then, I mean, sometimes they get,
uh they become part of culture and they get
transmitted as such and then they can change over
time in different conditions. But it's really, I guess
it would be fair to say that it's really
hard to disentangle many times what's bio, what's more
biologically based or more culturally based or, or contextually
based, even based on, for example, ecological factors and
so on.
Yes. Exactly. They're, they're very endogenous. They're strongly interrelated.
There's lots of interaction effects. And so yeah, disentangling
them is even um not even always necessarily the
best question to be asking too. We can think
about how and why different contexts are supporting different
uh preferences in leadership and how that relates to
gender. Um But yeah, it's very difficult to, to
disentangle effectively.
And so another uh topic that I would like
to explore with you here today is reputation and
I guess that will also tie to some extent
to leadership. So what is reputation in human societies?
Yeah. So reputation, especially in egalitarian societies is sort
of essential for becoming a leader. So it's, it
was interesting to think about how that ties in
the social influence. Um We typically define reputation as
the sort of collective judgments of an individual social
value um which is gonna be shaped by their
behavior, their achievements and their contributions to their communities.
And so it's not just the measure of what
people think about an individual, but it's this sort
of aggregation of beliefs and opinions and perceptions that
define how an individual is viewed in terms of
their, their character and their abilities and their overall
worth to the group. Um So like we've been
talking about it's gonna be very uh driven by
social context, cultural context. So at its core reputation
reflects how an individual's actions are aligning with the
cultural norms and values of their society. So it
could include domains like your moral character, but also
things like competence and social skills, specific talents. Um
You know, maybe being an adept hunter or skilled
mediator might be important domains of reputation, thinking about
what we've talked about so far. Um But the
diversity in all these domains really highlights the fact
that reputation isn't just a sort of monolithic construct,
but it, it really varies depending upon um, the
cultural context and societal structure.
And are there different domains of reputation?
Yeah. So that's an interesting question. I think, I
mean, the obvious answer is yes, you know, we
can have domains and we can have reputation in
many different domains as, as a, as a parents,
as a sibling. Um, IN your line of work
in your hobbies and so forth. Uh But I
think the, the interesting question though, is how many
domains are there or when are there more or
when are there less domains? Um And this, we
can think about personality in a, in a similar
way, for example, um Ricardo, you have a great
reputation as being this exceptional podcast host. Um But
to have that reputation, obviously, your social and economic
context has to have podcasts. You can't have a
reputation as being a great podcast host if you
don't have podcasts. And so the opportunity for reputation
is partly driven by, you know, the socio-economic context
in which you are embedded in. Um, AND there's
a, there's a line of thinking that suggests that
as sort of our social and political systems are
expanding in um in their component parts that creates
more opportunity for reputations um to be uh to,
to emerge. And so it can include a wide
range of different sort of professional specializations, economic and
political specializations and these are gonna be influenced and,
and change over time. And so we can think
about, we might think that, you know, the agricultural
societies, for example, might value different qualities compared to
hunter gatherer societies. Um SOCIETIES that engage in intergroup
conflict might value different qualities than those which have
less uh experience with intergroup conflict. So we really
think about how uh cultural ecology is shaping the
the range of reputations that are in a society.
And if we go back to the the gender
roles, we've been talking about um you know, different
individuals based on gender might have different tasks or
different challenges that they need to meet and therefore
have different reputation domains. Um A key reputation, a
key domain of reputation for women is often motherhood.
Um Sarah H he's talked a lot about this.
You see it in a lot of the work
on female leadership. Um BEING a good mother, having
successfully raised Children who, you know, have made it
and sort of are successful members of the community
that is usually a huge component of a female
reputation in more subsistence based societies.
And so if there are different domains of reputation
and some of those domains are highly specialized, particularly
in our more bigger scale societies. Uh Does that
point to um uh a bigger number of human
hierarchies? I mean, what I mean by this is
so you can be, for example, the best footballer
in the world but but not the best at
uh anything else or you might be the richest
man in the world but not really competent in
this or that different domain or the more competent
political leader, the more competent podcast or whatever. So
uh I I mean, o of course, then you
might be the more competent uh something but not
uh the people at the top in terms of
the socio-economic hierarchy. But what I'm trying to ask
you basically is uh does that uh complicate the
way we understand the hierarchy in human societies? Because
I guess that there are different in issues of
hierarchy,
right? Yeah, it very much does complicate. I think
the way we can think about hierarchy, you know,
we want to, you know, just even from a
scientific or empirical perspective, have sort of a, a
linear hierarchy where we can sort of think about
and maybe a two dimensional framework, individuals are high
or low and some metric, maybe we want to
call it status. Um But like you point out
that there are many different niches and groups that
individuals are embedded in. So while it might be
useful to think about sort of a, a sort
of pyramid as the way to represent hierarchy, there's
there's less space at the top. A few individuals
are at the top. Most individuals are in the
middle, at the bottom. I think we can think
about this in the maybe like a three dimensional
way where there are many different pyramids at many
different axes. And like you pointed out, you might
be high on one or a few but low
on others. And we, I think we probably have
some sort of uh psychology helping us decide how
we are going to pursue status and what sort
of reputations we are going to invest in pursuing.
We all have to make these decisions. Some are
probably made consciously so probably made subconsciously. But over
the course of our development, we're I think all
searching for domains in which we can compete for
status and where we can develop strong reputations. But
we have to make trade offs, you know, you
can pursue academics and that might, you know, trade
off uh with you know, maybe your, your uh
physical fitness if you need to invest your time
in only one domain or another. Um And so
we are embedded in all these different social groups
and we have higher and lower status and reputations
and all these different domains. Um And then individuals
who are exceptionally high status tend to probably be
high on a few of them. Um And so,
yeah, we can think about these different sort of
pyramids at all, these different axes in which we
are, we are constantly um embedded in our, in
our status is also dynamic. It's not just fixed
over time. So it is very complicated. And that's
uh yes, that's why it's a really interesting topic
to study.
And also to some extent, it provides you with
many different avenues for you to acquire a social
reputation and be successful, right? Because you might be,
I don't know, one of the best academics in
your particular field, but not be necessarily rich or
have very high socio-economic status. But that's particularly from
an evolutionary perspective, good enough because it grants you
access to good enough social reputation to do good
enough resources and so on for you to be
evolutionarily successful and perhaps successful in some other regards.
Right. Exactly. And I think it also has a
lot of implications in terms of how we structure
our social networks. Um INDIVIDUALS who are, you know,
high in social status often are associated with other
high status individuals, but it can be good to
have a diverse social network. Um So we all
kind of can understand this in your, in your
social groups or your um professional groups. It's going
to have a diversity of individuals who you can
rely on, who can help you buffer risk, who
can help you solve problems. And so you want
to have a variety of, of high status individuals,
but basically that, that diversity offers you a benefit
because it allows you to buffer different, different costs
that you're going to incur.
Mhm. And so to get into the last topic
of our conversation today, let's talk a little bit
more about conflict resolution. You've already mentioned that when
we talked about it being one of the functions
of leaders in smaller scale societies, but I guess
in our and also bigger scale society. So, but
what is conflict resolution more generally? And when we
talk about conflict resolution, what different kinds of conflict
uh might we need to resolve in human societies?
Yeah, that's an interesting question. I mean, conflict resolution
is effectively, you know, these, these methods, these processes
that individuals use to facilitate the peaceful ending of
of some conflict. Um We can think about all
different types of conflict. You know, evolutionary scientists are
gonna be well aware of things like parent offspring
conflict. Um So that shows that, you know, from
day one, there's conflict even not necessarily at a,
at a conscious level, but just uh uh preferences
for resources or for, for, for status. Um And
then, yeah, we are gonna have conflicts with everyone.
We're involved with our, our siblings, our parents, our
friends. Uh THIS involves this is gonna emerge when
there's any sort of um disputes. Um And so
I think, yeah, effective conflict resolution is going to
involve some sort of process of negotiation or mediation
or dialogue um to achieve these mutual acceptable agreements.
Now, that's in a more informal context. Now, of
course, there's conflict resolution can also take the form
of a police officer coming to a scene and,
and you know, giving a ticket and saying, ok,
you're at fault here, you're the one that ran
the red lights in this traffic accident. So you
are going to have to, to pay for the
the solution. Um But on a more inter individual
level, uh it's gonna be much more, more nuanced
and difficult and that's when this sort of conflict
resolution service is gonna become much more important to,
to solve these disputes. And that's going to involve
understanding the root cause of the conflict probably and
finding some way to resolve them that are acceptable
to both parties and in more smaller scale social
context, which could be uh you know, it could
be a small scale society or it could be
a smaller scale, you know, maybe professional group. It's
very important that the individuals who are in conflict
come back together and maintain some sort of social
relationship because uh our social groups, our, our communities,
our family groups are really dependent upon that interdependence.
Um And if conflicts stand to break down that
interdependence, that's a problem, not just for the individuals
who are in conflict, but for everyone in that
social group. And so it seems like leadership in
more smaller scale, more face to face context is
really focused on, you're not identifying someone who is
at fault and someone needs to pay a fine
or someone should say I'm sorry or something like
that. But the key outcome is that the individuals
who are in conflict uh resolve that conflict and
restore uh their die cooper operation and basically find
a way to move forward in a way that
is gonna allow them to be good cooper partners.
So that seems to be a sort of key
outcome of conflict resolution uh either in small scale
societies or in just more face to face social
dynamics.
A and the very important thing here for people
to understand is that we are basically participating in
conflict resolution all the time. I mean, in our
own families, our own communities and other smaller scale
contexts, right? Because since we live now in societies
where we are used to having, for example, legal
systems in place and police to come um and
resolve particular kinds of conflicts. Because of course, we
don't know uh everyone around us and so we
can't really keep everyone in check or negotiate with
them. So we need something like police in our
bigger scale societies. But it's something that is pretty
much ubiquitous across societies and across different social contexts.
Right? And now it's important to point out too,
there are other, more, let's say institutional mechanisms to
resolve conflicts as well. Um And that can be
really useful to sort of detach the conflict resolution
from a particular individual. So you have things like
um different sort of supernatural mechanisms to identify who
is at fault and who's not even in hunter
gatherer societies. Um But then those become, I think
much more elaborated uh as societies become larger and
have more interconnected parts. But so when we have
individuals resolving conflicts and when we have more institutional
conflict resolution is an interesting question. But then the
individuals who typically are able to offer these conflict
resolution services tend to be people who have good
social supports, uh who are known for their decision
making capacities. Um I'm reanalyzing some of my data
from uh the child right now. And one thing
I found is that a good predictor of conflict
resolution is not necessarily being high on dominance or
high on prestige, these other important dimensions of leadership,
it's really being high on good decision making capacities
um and intelligence. So that suggests that conflict resolution
is really, it's a, it's a difficult, it's a
cognitively demanding task to analyze a conflict, understand the
individuals involved and propose some outcome that's going to
be mutually acceptable by both individuals. So it's not
so much just being respected or being feared, but
it's this important sort of socio cognitive capacity that
I think really allows conflict resolution by individuals to
be effective,
but for it to be effective, I mean, those
threats have to be recognized in the particular individual
that's going to play a role in conflict resolution
by both parties that are part of the conflict,
right? I mean, it has to be someone that
people know as those traits and that they respect
as someone that will be able to play a
role in resolving that particular kind of conflict.
Right. Exactly. And this is where reputation plays an
important role in helping broadcast and identify individuals who
possess those capacities.
Mhm. Uh, AND so, uh, I mean, are there
different ways of resolving conflict and do they vary
across societies?
Um, YEAH, there are. So we kind of touch
on this a little bit. Um, YOU know, it
can involve discussion. Um, THERE'S a lot of consensus
decision making that happens a lot of conflict resolution
in 100 gatherers, but also in pastoralists based on
my experiences and ethnography. I've read will involve a
sort of gathering of respected individuals for a council
and they'll resolve and that they'll discuss and debate
and eventually come to some, they'll determine, you know,
who is at fault and what should happen. And,
you know, maybe one individual who was in dispute
might not be super happy with the outcome, but
it's a consensus, it's a large number of individuals
and there's really no choice but for them to
accept it. And so they basically have to accept
that outcome to, to move forward and to basically,
to continue to get along with other people in
their society. So it can be basically this system.
Um uh So that's kind of one way sort
of council of elders or council of respective individuals.
It can also be just one individual who might
come, who might be around to resolve the conflict.
Uh Also, uh the individuals in conflict might nominate
or find an individual to advocate on their behalf,
that sort of evokes a sort of sort of
court of law type of system. Um But we
see this in the pastor, this context, individuals might
nominate their bond friend, which is someone who has
a special sort of formalized social connection to them.
And then these two individuals who are not unbiased
because they are socially connected to the person in
conflict but not directly involved in the conflict, they
might then discuss and negotiate and, and find some
system of some resolution. So those are ways in
which individuals can resolve conflicts. Uh But we also
talked about other more institutional systems as well. Uh
The oracle bones is one sort of famous example
from, from history from Ancient China, uh where there's
these bones um that are, that are used in
different um different contexts, sometimes they're burnt or, or
other, other processes are applied to them. And then
based on the, the cracks or the the patterns
in the bones, someone who has expertise to do
this can sort of uh um sort of discern
some outcome based on, based on the social context.
So it disassociates the decision from an individual and
it makes the individuals in conflict more sort of
bound to accept the outcome. And we see other
examples of this across a wide range of societies.
Um THE poison oracles. Another example from many hunter
gatherer societies that typically involves uh either an individual
or a chicken taking some poison and then whether
it survives or dies is gonna be associated with
a particular outcome. And then that's going to be
sort of uh the final word when it comes
to this particular outcome. So these are sort of
social technologies that are going to, yeah, allow an
individual practitioner to intervene, who's ideally un unbiased and
to use this sort of external system that is
maybe relatively random or in many cases uh to
then apply some outcome. And on the whole over
time, it should hopefully resolve conflicts in the interests
of most individuals or at least allow individuals to
come back and restore that cooper relationship and accept
whatever some other uh outcome has has been.
Mhm. And so I guess that you've already touched
more or less directly on this point. But I
guess that one of the things that whenever people
are resolving conflicts appeal to or rely on a
lot would be social norms. Right. I mean, whether
it's a particular individual, a high status individual with
high reputation that comes in and tries to mediate
the conflict resolution between both parties or if more
or if it's of a collective decision and it's
basically the entire community coming together to resolve the
conflict. One of the things that people usually appeal
to is social norms, uh shared values. Uh uh
BECAUSE many times the way people resolve conflict is
trying to decide who among both parties perhaps violated
a particular social norm or something like that.
Right. Yes, exactly. So if there's a norm that
should identify, you know, who has transgressed that norm
and, and who is responsible, um because it gets
muddy when there are, you know, one conflict may
lead to another and then sort of disentangling fault
can be quite challenging. And so, and some of
the reports I got collecting data from the hammer
on conflict resolution. You know, there might be, you
know, someone didn't keep their fence quite secure, so
someone else's goat got in the field. Um BUT
then maybe someone else like got upset at that
person's goat and then maybe you violated some other
social norm by you slandering them or saying things
they shouldn't have said. So then it just becomes
this, this mess. Um, BECAUSE there's lots of different,
there's many different causes of fault all embedded in,
in really what you, I think it was one
conflict. Um, AND so that's when someone who really,
uh, can peacefully and calmly understand both individuals perspectives
and the norms that may or may not have
been violated, uh, can help resolve that conflict. But,
yeah, you're exactly right that um conflicts are often
driven by social norms because there are violations of
norms.
Yeah, I, I wanted to touch on that point
because, uh I mean, I guess that when it
comes to conflict resolution and als also many other
ways we establish relationships with other people, we most
of the time rely on arguments on things that
are convincing to other people and in this particular
case, social norm, shared values and so on, it
tend to be very convincing.
Right. Yes, exactly. So, um this is the sort
of the, the law of the land, so to
speak in any particular community. What is it that
we, we agree on? And, and those are really
indisputable. Now, there's variation in interpretation and individuals are
trying to manipulate or, you know, use those norms
to their advantage. Uh But ultimately, there's a, something
is a norm was violated or not or this
is a norm or it isn't. And when it
comes to that interpretation, it's typically relying on, you
know, the the body of the collective body of
knowledge, you know, in the, in this case, it's
usually elders who are the sort of authorities on
what is the right way. Um And yeah, so
by being a member of that social group, you're
sort of uh consenting to comply with a set
of social norms and those norms are often very
difficult. And so some other work of mine is
looking at how those norms are transmitted from one
generation to the next. And it seems like these,
you know, really opaque social norms for how to
behave, you know, when should you defer to an
elder or not or you know, what are the,
the sort of way to behave in very nuanced
situations? Um Even if you think about greetings, you
know, greetings are sometimes ambiguous and hard, you know,
should I, should I stand up and meet, talk
to this person? Should I shake your hand? Should
I not? Should we hug? Should we not? There's
a lot of variation in what is the, the
best in the appropriate social norm in a particular
context. And it seems like, you know, particular leaders
who are informed and have the opportunity and platform
to, to teach these norms are very active in
their teaching. And so in order to be successful
in a cultural context, you have to learn these
norms and learning these norms requires teaching. So I
think this is a good example of how you
know, individual capacities and social norms uh work together
in a sort of cultural evolutionary process to allow
individuals to exhibit proper behavior and, and be successful
in their social groups.
By the way, when it comes to leaders, and
this will be my last question. Uh EARLIER, we've
talked about men and women, but there's perhaps one
more demographic aspect that I would like to ask
you about. So those leadership tend to correlate with
age. So, I mean, I would imagine that people
need enough time to become leaders to acquire the
necessary competences. Uh I mean, I, I if it's,
for example, becoming the best hunter, they need enough
time to develop their hunting skills if it's becoming
a sham and they need to acquire enough knowledge
to get to that point and so on. But
then I would imagine that after a certain point
as they get older, as they become, as they
become weaker, as their bodies become frail and as
they experience cognitive decline as well, that perhaps, uh
uh I mean, their leadership or the, uh they
would be put out of their leadership positions because
they are no longer respected as such or something
like that, right? I, I mean, is, is this
a correct view of things or?
Yeah, that's a, that's a great point. And so
this kind of comes back to what are more
of the, the variable dimensions of leadership because uh
age is one of the measures that we found
in the cross cultural data that was variable. And
we did find that age was more associated with
being a leader of kin groups. And that probably
is because in kin groups, a lot of the
conflict resolute, a lot of the leadership is conflict
resolution. And it's these old individuals who really know
everyone and understand different individuals, states of mind and
priorities um and biases and are able to offer
either counsel or advice, um resolve conflicts and so
forth. So I think age plays an important role
in, in that ty that type of leadership. Um
Yeah, I think you're right in that it requires
some expertise and there's a expertise and age and
experience are endogenous. So whether it's experience or age,
it's obviously a little, it's obviously a mix of
both. Um So age is often playing a role
in that regard. It requires time to develop the
capacities and the knowledge. Um But yeah, it does
decline, but it's interesting. It, it does and it
doesn't, I, I think of one example when I
was working with the chau, there was the the
oldest man. He was probably in his early nineties
when I was doing some of my field work.
And he had been, you know, this legendary guy.
He had been an amazing hunter when he was
younger. He had been captured by slave Raiders and
had escapes. Uh YOU know, all of his sons
were the high set guys in the group and
he was just revered and respected. He was obviously
way past his prime. He could barely see anymore.
You know, he walked around, he got around quite
well, but it still was a bit of a
challenge and he had these, this way of telling
stories that was really kind of comical and funny
because he was from a different generation, a different
era. And so the younger people really kind of
saw him in a kind of a comical way.
Um But at the same time, they respected him.
So he had certainly lost uh sort of social
influence. He wasn't involved in resolving conflicts or organizing
uh collective actions or really doing anything related to
leadership at all, even though let's say maybe 2030
40 years ago, he would have been, but he
was still very respected. So I think he certainly
had lost some component of that sort of day
to day leadership behaviors, but he still had a
very important place in society. So I think this
kind of gets back to something we mentioned earlier
in that there are all these different sort of
axes of social status or social influence and some
are gonna decline and, and limit your ability to
be a leader or have influence. Uh But some
might be more robust. Uh AND they might just
change over time. And there's a very important developmental
process of leadership which I think you, you touched
on quite well. Uh SOME of this based on
capacities and skills as those decline, that influence will
decline as well. But other is based on social
value that, that may not decline. And um I
think some of that is gonna be robust to
the, you know, the process of senescence while others
are not.
Mhm. So would you like to tell us what
kind of things you're working on at the moment
and you will be working on in the near
future?
Yeah, thanks. I mean, I'm working really heavily with
my colleague, Lolo Ay, who we might talk about
earlier. We're collecting data from a number of different
pastoral communities in Southwest Ethiopia to really track how
transitions in their economic and political structures are related
to other features of their culture and health outcomes.
So, we've been doing a lot of field work
among among hammer communities and other pastoralist communities in
Southwest Ethiopia. Um And then sort of on a
more theoretical level. I'm working on a few different
ideas about how um teaching and leadership are co
evolving and driving human co-operation. That's one project. Another
project I'm working on is looking at the different
forms of capital that are associated with leadership. Um
We've kind of touched on some of this, that's
something I'm working on now. And um we're also
working on a long term social networks project where
we're looking at between group, social relationships between group
friendships in the OMO Valley in Ethiopia and how
uh these relationships across cultural groups are being used
to buffer risk or not and sort of how
they're, how they're driving uh the sort of social,
social structures of different societies. Um So those are
a few things. I'm, I'm working on at the
moment
and if people are interested, where can they find
you when you work on the internet?
Yeah. So you can find me on math on
Twitter blue sky there. Um You can also check
out our website uh the Omo Valley research project.org.
So in addition to doing our, our anthropological scientific
work, uh Luke and I are also heavily active
in a sort of a philanthropic component. So we're
always looking for um individual donations. We're able to
use this money to support the education of rural
students. So there are a few individuals who have
come from these rural pastoralist villages who have finished
high school and they're often really interested in going
to university to often study things like be science
or, or medicine or business. Um You know, they
want to help their communities in any way they
can. And so we identify these individuals, we have
a grants committee. Um AND then we're able to
fund their education. So that's been really rewarding and
exciting to, you know, see these kids who have
come from, you know, rural villages, uh kind of
progress and, and go through and pursue education. So,
yeah, you can check us out um on the
oval research project.org to, to learn more about that.
So I will be leaving links to all of
that in the description box of this interview. And
Doctor Garfield, thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk to you and hopefully
somewhere in the future, we might have another conversation
because I really love the work you're doing.
Thank you so much, Ricardo. Thank you for all
your work to promote um human evolutionary, social science
across such a, a broad audience. I really appreciate
it and it's a great service for, for our
communities.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and La Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith. J Tom Hummel S Friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi,
Nale Me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and Y
Polton John Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franka la Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott
Zachary FTDW Daniel Friedman, William Buckner Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Oin David
Williams Di A Costa, Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior,
Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark
Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Week in the B brand Nicholas
Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman Perros
Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Shan Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard
N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Rumble, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick
Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si
Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all.